Title: Behavior Cloning of MPC for 3-DOF Robotic Manipulators

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.00383v1

Published Time: Tue, 02 Jun 2026 00:22:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
Behavior Cloning of MPC for 3-DOF Robotic 

# Manipulators 

Theo Guegan 

University of Waterloo 

theo.guegan@etu.utc.fr 

Wen Jie Dexter Teo 

University of Waterloo 

WTEO030@e.ntu.edu.sg 

Abstract —While Model Predictive Control (MPC) provides 

strong stability and robustness, it imposes a significant 

computational burden on real-time systems. This paper 

investigates the application of Behavior Cloning to approx -

imate MPC policies for the real-time control of a 3-degree-

of-freedom robotic manipulator. We present a baseline 

controller combining Inverse Kinematics with MPC and 

evaluate neural network architectures, ranging from classi -

cal regression algorithms to deep learning models including 

Deep MLPs and RNNs, to derive computationally efficient 

surrogate policies. We analyze generalization capabilities, 

stability considerations, and the trade-offs inherent in differ -

ent architectural choices. Our empirical study employs both 

online and offline evaluations to assess performance regard -

ing accuracy, computational efficiency, and fidelity to the 

original MPC policy. Our results demonstrate that Behavior 

Cloning can effectively reduce the computational burden 

of MPC policies for 3-DOF robotic manipulators, achieving 

a 3x reduction in inference latency with a 84.98% success 

rate under relaxed tolerances. Notably, we find that static 

architectures outperform temporal variants, confirming the 

sufficiency of instantaneous state observations for this task. 

However, we observe a precision gap under strict tolerances, 

which suggest that while Behavior Cloning captures the 

global optimal trajectory, further research is needed to min -

imize terminal steady-state error. 

I.  Introduction 

Model Predictive Control (MPC) has been widely used 

for robotic manipulation  [1] , offering an optimal control 

strategy with strong stability and robustness. However, the 

computational cost of MPC for solving the optimization 

problems limits its applicability for both real-time systems 

and resource-constrained devices. Neural networks, with 

their diverse architectures, offer a promising and computa -

tionally efficient alternative for approximating MPC policies 

[2] . We consider a 3-degree-of-freedom (3-DOF) robotic 

manipulator operating in a MuJoCo simulation environment. 

The simulation environment provides a realistic and control -

lable environment for testing and evaluating the proposed 

methodology. MuJoCo also handles gravity compensation 

and joint friction, allowing us to simplify the control problem 

and focus on the learning aspect. The control objective cen -

ters on driving the end-effector to reach a 3D cartesian target 

1 This work was conducted during an exchange program at University of 

Waterloo. T. Guegan is currently with the Universite de Technologie de 

Compiègne, France, and ML Intern at Opalin, Redwood City, CA. W. J. D. 

Teo is currently with Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, and 

Research Intern at Polytechnique Montréal, QC, Canada. 

Code available :  https://github.com/theguega/neural-mpc 

position within the robot’s reachable workspace. Inspired by 

the recent usage of imitation learning for complex controls 

[3] , we present a complete data generation pipeline for col -

lecting high-quality demonstrations of the desired behavior 

and an empirical evaluation of both feedforward and recur -

rent neural networks for policy learning. Our experiment 

focuses on minimizing the control error and testing the 

ability of the learned policy to generalize in the simulation 

environment. 

II.  Problem Formulation 

A.  System Description 

We consider a 3-DOF robotic manipulator defined by 

generalized coordinates  𝑞  = [𝑞 1, 𝑞 2, 𝑞 3]𝑇  ∈ ℝ3, representing 

joint angles, and their time derivatives  ̇  𝑞  ∈ ℝ3. The full 

observable state at discrete time step  𝑘  is 

𝑥 𝑘  = [𝑞 𝑇  

> 𝑘

,̇ 𝑞 𝑇  

> 𝑘

]𝑇  ∈ ℝ6 (1) 

The manipulator operates in a MuJoCo simulation envi -

ronment ( Figure 2 ) governed by rigid-body dynamics with 

gravity compensation. The control objective is to drive the 

end-effector to track randomly sampled, reachable 3D Carte -

sian target positions  𝑝 des  ∈ ℝ3 within the robot’s workspace  𝒲︀ 

⊂ ℝ3.

Fig. 2. 3-DOF Arm in MuJoCo  Fig. 3. 3-DOF Arm Schema  [4] 

III.  Baseline Controller: MPC with Inverse Kine -

matics 

Our baseline controller uses a hierarchical architecture 

combining an Inverse Kinematics (IK) module and a MPC 

module. The IK module computes the joint angles required 

to achieve the desired end-effector position, while the MPC 

module optimizes the joint velocities to minimize the control 

error. 

A.  Inverse Kinematics Formulation 

The IK module translates desired end-effector positions 

into feasible joint-space configurations. Let  𝑝 (𝑞 ) : ℝ3 → ℝ3

1denote the forward kinematics mapping. The Cartesian error 

is defined as: 

𝑒  = 𝑝 des  − 𝑝 (𝑞 ) (2) 

We solve the IK problem using the Jacobian transpose 

method with Damped Least Squares (DLS) for numerical 

stability near singularities. The iterative update rule is: 

Δ𝑞  = 𝐽  𝑇  (𝐽  𝐽  𝑇  + 𝜆 2𝐼 )−1𝑒  (3) 

where  𝐽  (𝑞 ) = d(𝜕 𝑝 , 𝜕 𝑞 ) ∈ ℝ3×3 denotes the geometric 

Jacobian and  𝜆  represents the damping factor. 

To prevent overshooting or divergence, the joint update 

is clamped to a maximum norm relative to the step size 

𝛼  ∈ [0, 1]:

Δ𝑞  = {Δ𝑞  if  ‖Δ𝑞 ‖ ≤ 𝛼 

Δ𝑞  ∗ 𝛼  

> ‖Δ𝑞 ‖

otherwise  (4) 

Finally, joint angles are wrapped to avoid numerical drift: 

𝑞 𝑖  ← atan2 (sin (𝑞 𝑖 ), cos (𝑞 𝑖 )) (5) 

B.  Model Predictive Control Formulation 

The MPC module is given the desired joint angles  𝑞 des  ∈

ℝ3 from the IK module and computes optimal control 

torques  𝜏 MPC  with a specified prediction horizon. We sim -

plify the system dynamics for the MPC formulation by 

assuming unit inertia and neglecting Coriolis effects, justified 

by MuJoCo’s compensation of complex dynamics. This yields 

a double-integrator model where the control input  𝜏 MPC 

effectively commands joint acceleration: ̈

𝑞  = 𝜏 MPC  (6) 

With  𝑥  = [𝑞 ,̇ 𝑞 ]𝑇  ∈ ℝ6 and discrete-time dynamics: 

𝑥 𝑘 +1 = 𝑥 𝑘  + Δ𝑡  ∗ [̇ 𝑞 𝑘 

𝜏 MPC,k 

] = 𝑓 (𝑥 𝑘 , 𝜏 𝑘 ) (7) 

The MPC solves a finite-horizon optimal control problem 

with quadratic cost function: 

min 

> 𝜏 0:𝑁 −1

∑

> 𝑁 −1
> 𝑘 =0

(‖𝑥 𝑘  − 𝑥 ref ‖2 

> Q

+ ‖𝜏 𝑘 ‖2

> R

) + ‖𝑥 𝑁  − 𝑥 ref ‖Q2

> N

(8) 

subject to: 

𝑥 k+1  = 𝑓 (𝑥 𝑘 , 𝜏 𝑘 ), 𝑥 0 = 𝑥 (𝑡 ), 𝜏 min  ≤ 𝜏 𝑘  ≤ 𝜏 max  (9) 

Where  𝑥 ref  = [𝑞 des , 0𝑇  ]𝑇  is the target state, and  𝑸 , 𝑹 , 𝑸 𝑵 

are positive definite matrices. The optimization problem is 

solved using CasADI  [5]  with OSQP optimization solver. 

IV.  Data Generation Pipeline 

To enable behavior cloning from the expert IK–MPC con -

troller, we generate a dataset of joint angles, joint velocities, 

target positions, and predicted torques from a closed-loop 

MuJoCo simulation. The process for each episode is: 

A.  Collection process 

1)  Target sampling: A reachable end-effector target 

𝑝 des  ∈ ℝ3 is sampled within the workspace  𝒲︀  using 

cylindrical coordinates to sample a radius  𝑟  and height 

𝑧  uniformly within the workspace bounds. 

2)  The IK solver computes the corresponding joint-space 

reference  𝑞 des .

3)  Given the current state  𝑥 𝑘  and a specified prediction 

horizon  𝑁  , the MPC controller generates torque com -

mands  𝜏 MPC  to achieve the desired joint angles and 

velocities. 

4)  For each time step  𝑘 , we record the current state 

[𝑞 1, 𝑞 2, 𝑞 3,̇ 𝑞 1,̇ 𝑞 2,̇ 𝑞 3] ∈ ℝ6, the target  𝑝 des  ∈ ℝ3, and 

the predicted torque  𝜏 MPC  ∈ ℝ3.

5)  We step the simulation until the end of the episode 

or until the target is reached using  𝜏  = 𝜏 MPC  +

𝜏 env  (where  𝜏 env  represents the forces computed by 

MuJoCo to compensate for Coriolis, centrifugal, and 

gravitational effects, ensuring the simplified dynamics 

model in the MPC controller remains valid; MuJoCo 

bias force:  mjData.qfrc_bias ). 

During this process, if either the MPC controller or the 

IK solver fails to converge, we discard the data for that time 

step to retain only high-quality samples. 

B.  Dataset Structure 

After generation, the data is stored in HDF5 format, 

grouped by episodes containing synchronized sequences of 

states ( 6𝐷 ), targets ( 3𝐷 ), and actions ( 3𝐷 ). 

This hierarchical format preserves the temporal integrity 

of each trial, allowing us to process the data differently 

depending on the model architecture. The raw data is loaded 

via a custom MPCDataset class, which constructs the input 

feature vector  𝑥  by concatenating the state ( ℝ6) and the 

target ( ℝ3), resulting in a 9-dimensional input vector. 

> Fig. 4. Visualization of a random episode

Depending on the learning algorithm, the data is 

processed differently according to the model architecture. 

a)  Flat Formatting: 

For non-sequential algorithms (e.g., MLPs, Random 

Forests), temporal dependencies are discarded to maximize 

sample efficiency. We treat every timestep  𝑡  from every 

episode as an independent sample (i.i.d). 

𝑋 flat  ∈ ℝ𝑁 ×9, 𝑌 flat  ∈ ℝ𝑁 ×3 (10) 

Where  𝑁  = ∑𝐸  

> 𝑖 =0

𝑇 𝑖  is the total number of timesteps 

across all episodes. 

2b)  Sequential Formatting: 

For time-series algorithms such as GRU, preserving the 

temporal dependencies is crucial. We treat every episode as 

a sequence of timesteps, where each timestep is a sample. 

𝑋 seq  ∈ ℝ𝐸 ×𝑇  ×9, 𝑌 seq  ∈ ℝ𝐸 ×𝑇  ×3 (11) 

Where  𝐸  is the number of episodes and  𝑇  is the number 

of timesteps per episode. 

c)  Sliding Window Formatting: 

To approximate a recurrent structure with our MLP archi -

tecture, we augment each time step with its previous  𝑊 

timesteps. This injects short-term memory into an otherwise 

i.i.d. formulation. 

For each timestep  𝑡 , we create a new input vector  𝑋 seq {𝑡 }

by concatenating the current state  𝑋 {𝑡 } with the previous  𝑊 

states  𝑋 {𝑡 −1}, 𝑋 {𝑡 −2}, …, 𝑋 {𝑡 −𝑊  }, and the target  ∈ 𝑅 3 only 

once to avoid redundancy. 

𝑋 seq  ∈ ℝ𝑁 ×(𝑊  ⋅6+3), 𝑌 seq  ∈ ℝ𝑁  (12) 

C.  Data Preprocessing 

Our goal is to develop a robust and reliable controller that 

can handle uncertainties and disturbances in the system. To 

this end, we introduce small Gaussian noise to both the input 

state  [𝑞 1, 𝑞 2, 𝑞 3,̇ 𝑞 1,̇ 𝑞 2,̇ 𝑞 3] and the output action  𝜏 MPC . This 

noise simulates real-world conditions such as sensor noise, 

actuator noise, and environmental disturbances. Because the 

data generation pipeline can produce an arbitrary number of 

samples, we collect a large dataset for training and increase 

the number of samples until the validation loss plateaus or 

computational limits are reached. 

We ran a simple experiment with both SVR and MLP 

models from  Scikit-learn  and compared their performance 

while increasing the number of samples progressively. 

> Fig. 5. MSE vs number of samples (5 trials per model)

Our experiment showed a clear plateau after 30000 sam -

ples  Figure 5 , therefore we decided to use only 35000 samples 

for the training of our regression algorithms. However, we 

also observed that RNN models such as GRU were taking 

full benefits of the full dataset by improving significantly 

compared to MLP models even after 30000 samples. 

Nevertheless, since our focus is on finding a suitable 

architecture for a neural surrogate, we continue to utilize 

the full dataset for training all of our models for a fair 

comparison. 

V.  Neural Network Architecture 

We formulated the learning problem as a regression task, 

where the goal is to predict the torque  𝜏 MPC  given the 

current state  𝑥 𝑘  and the target  𝑝 des . We aimed to minimize 

the error between the neural network policy  𝜋 𝜃  and the 

expert MPC actions: 

min  

> 𝜃

𝐿 (𝜋 𝜃 (𝑋 ), 𝜏 MPC ) (13) 

where  𝐿  is a loss function that measures the difference 

between the predicted torque and the expert MPC torque. 

We investigated a range of models, from traditional machine 

learning to deep learning architecture, to understand their 

effectiveness in approximating the MPC policy. For this task, 

we compared the performance with 2 different loss functions: 

• Mean Squared Error (MSE) 

• Mean Absolute Error (MAE) 

A.  Regression Baselines 

To establish performance benchmarks, we evaluated sev -

eral standard regression algorithms from the Scikit-learn 

library. These models operate on the “flat” dataset format, 

treating each timestep as an independent sample. We in -

cluded tree-based regressors (Random Forest and Gradient 

Boosting) and a shallow MLP regressor as a lightweight 

baseline to compare against our deeper custom architectures. 

B.  Custom Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) 

We implemented a custom feedforward network to explore 

the impact of model capacity on cloning accuracy. This 

model processes the flat input vector through a series of fully 

connected linear layers with ReLU activations. We conducted 

an architectural search by varying: 

• Depth: Number of hidden layers 

• Width: Number of neurons per layer 

This memory-less architecture captures and learns directly 

the mapping from the current state and target to the required 

control action. 

C.  Time Series Models 

To investigate whether historical context improves control 

fidelity, we evaluated architectures designed to capture tem -

poral dependencies. 

a)  Sliding Window MLP: 

We implemented Sliding Window variants with the same 

depth and width parameters as our custom MLP. These 

variants receive a concatenated history of the past W state 

observations as input, where we set  𝑊  = 5. This explicitly 

injects short-term memory into the network to test if pro -

viding temporal history can improve predictions. 

b)  Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs): 

We evaluated Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) networks. 

These models maintain a hidden state  ℎ𝑡  that summarizes 

the history of the episode up to time  𝑡  − 1. The final hidden 

state is then passed through a linear output layer to produce 

the predicted torque  𝜋 𝜃 (𝑋 ). Here again, we varied the number 

of hidden units per layer and the number of layers. 

ℎ𝑡  = RNN (𝑥 𝑡 , ℎ𝑡 −1), 𝜋 𝜃 (𝑋 ) = Linear (ℎ𝑡 ) (14) 

3VI.  Evaluation Methodology 

We evaluated the learned policies using a combination of 

offline and online metrics: 

A.  Offline Metrics 

We used MAE and Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) to 

measure the average deviation of the predicted torques from 

the expert torques. Additionally, we defined Direction Accu -

racy (DA) to evaluate whether the model correctly identifies 

the sign (direction) of joint acceleration. 

DA  = 1

3𝑁  ∑

> 𝑁
> 𝑖 =0

∑

> 3
> 𝑗 =1

𝕀 (sign (𝜏 MPC,i,j ) = sign (𝜋 𝜃 (𝑋 𝑖 )𝑗 ))(15) 

Finally, we measured the proportion of variance in the 

expert’s action that is explained by our model, using ex -

plained variance. It is a normalized, scale-invariant metric 

for comparing performance defined as follows: 

Explained Variance  = 1 − Var (𝜏 MPC  − 𝜋 𝜃 (𝑋 ))

Var (𝜏 MPC ) (16) 

B.  Online Metrics 

To assess the closed-loop performance, we deployed the 

trained policies in our simulation environment and evaluated 

them on the following criteria: 

• Success Rate: The percentage of episodes where the 

end-effector’s final position converges within a speci -

fied tolerance  𝜀  of the target 

‖𝑝 final  − 𝑝 des ‖2 < 𝜀  (17) 

• Average Position Error: The mean Euclidean distance 

between the end-effector and the target across the 

entire trajectory. This verifies that the model actively 

minimizes error rather than just drifting near the goal. 

• Computational Time Efficiency: The average inference 

latency per control step. We compare this against the 

baseline MPC solution time to confirm that the neural 

networks achieve higher control frequencies. 

• Computational Cost: Average CPU utilization during 

operation, ensuring the surrogate model is sufficiently 

lightweight for potential deployment on embedded 

systems. 

VII.  Results 

A.  Regression Baseline 

For our regression baseline with scikit-learn, we evaluated 

several standard regression algorithms using the collected 

offline dataset. As discussed before, we used only a subset 

of the whole dataset for a total of  35000 samples, split into 

80% for training and  20% for testing. The input feature 

space  𝑋  ∈ ℝ9 consists of the robot’s current state and target 

coordinates, while the output target  𝑌  ∈ ℝ3 corresponds 

to the applied joint actions (torques). The data was parti -

tioned into a training set ( 80%) and a test set ( 20%) via 

random shuffling. To ensure the statistical significance of the 

reported metrics, each model was trained and evaluated over 

5 independent runs.  Table I  summarizes the performance 

across MSE, MAE, Explained Variance, and Directional 

Accuracy. We also tried scaling our features using Scikit-

Learn’s StandardScaler, which did not significantly improve 

performance.                                

> TABLE I
> Comparison of regression algorithms on the validation set (aver -
> aged over 5 runs).
> Model MSE
> (Mean ±
> CI)
> MAE
> (Mean ±
> CI)
> Expl.
> Var Dir. Acc. MSE/
> Torque
> Ridge 8.729±
> 0.098
> 1.418±
> 0.0090.221 0.681 [𝟺.𝟸𝟺, 𝟻.𝟻𝟺, 𝟷𝟼.𝟺𝟷 ]
> Random
> Forest
> 0.097±
> 0.003
> 0.111±
> 0.0020.991 0.999 [𝟶.𝟶𝟻, 𝟶.𝟶𝟾, 𝟶.𝟷𝟼 ]
> MLP Re -
> gressor
> 0.053±
> 0.013
> 0.094±
> 0.0090.994 0.938 [𝟶.𝟶𝟻, 𝟶.𝟶𝟹, 𝟶.𝟶𝟽 ]
> Gra -
> dient
> Boost -
> ing
> 1.017±
> 0.059
> 0.243±
> 0.0050.843 0.996 [𝟸.𝟹𝟶, 𝟶.𝟷𝟶, 𝟶.𝟼𝟻 ]
> KNN
> Regres -
> sor
> 0.237±
> 0.038
> 0.091±
> 0.0020.976 0.999 [𝟶.𝟸𝟶, 𝟶.𝟷𝟷, 𝟶.𝟺𝟶 ]

The results highlight the inherent non-linearity of the 

inverse dynamics mapping. Linear Regression failed to 

capture the underlying relationship, exhibiting high vari -

ance across all torque dimensions. In contrast, non-linear 

methods performed significantly better. The MLP Regressor 

achieved the lowest overall MSE (0.053), indicating its 

superior capability in minimizing large control deviations, 

which is critical for preventing hardware damage. While 

KNN Regressor achieved the highest Directional Accuracy 

(99.87%) and lowest MAE, its higher MSE suggests it suffers 

from occasional large prediction errors (outliers). Finally, 

different SVM models with linear and radial basis function 

(RBF) kernels were evaluated. However, as mentioned in the 

documentation, RBF kernels cannot scale with that many 

samples, whereas linear kernels yielded poor performance. 

> Fig. 6. Mean Squared Error per Torque

B.  Loss comparison 

In this section, we compare performance of training mod -

els with two different loss functions. For this part we used a 

PyTorch implementation of the MLP regressor and of a GRU 

4RNNs.  Table II  summarizes the results of our experiments 

where the name of the model configuration is the name of 

the model and the loss function used for training.                               

> TABLE II
> Loss Comparison
> Model Config MSE (Mean ±Std) MAE (Mean ±Std)
> MLP_mse 0.1460±0.05220.1474±0.0126
> MLP_mae 0.2017±0.04550.0892±0.0078
> GRU_mse 1.1442±0.14410.2581±0.0138
> GRU_mae 2.1821±0.10010.3570±0.0101

Following this experiment, we adopted the MSE loss 

function for our experiments because models trained with 

it consistently achieved lower test error and lower vari -

ance across runs, as shown in  Table II . In particular, the 

MLP_mse and GRU_mse configurations outperformed their 

MAE-trained counterparts in terms of MSE, which was our 

primary performance metric for policy imitation. 

C.  Hyperparameters Tuning of MLP and GRU 

In this section, we present the offline evaluation metrics 

collected during the training of MLP and GRU models to 

determine the optimal architecture for our task. 

a)  Experimental Setup:  To ensure the reliability of our 

results, each model configuration was trained and evaluated 

5 times. The dataset was split into training (80%), valida -

tion (10%), and testing (10%) sets. The results presented in 

Figure 7  reflect the MSE on the test set. 

We also monitored validation loss to detect potential 

overfitting. No significant overfitting was observed in any 

of the experiments across the tested architectures and data 

augmentation strategies. As established in previous sections, 

the MLP models were trained on a subset of 35,000 timesteps, 

which was deemed sufficient for convergence, while the 

GRU models utilized the full dataset to capture temporal 

dependencies effectively. 

b)  Tested Architectures:  We evaluated four variations of 

the Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) and four variations of the 

Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) network. The specific hyperpa -

rameters for each configuration are detailed in  Table III .                  

> TABLE III
> Summary of model architectures and hyperparameters used during
> tuning.
> Model Name Type Parameters
> MLP_Small MLP Hidden Layers: [64, 32]
> MLP_Medium MLP Hidden Layers: [128, 64]
> MLP_Deep MLP Hidden Layers: [256, 128, 64, 32]
> MLP_Deep_Scaled MLP Hidden Layers: [512, 256, 128, 64]
> GRU_Shallow GRU Hidden Dim: 64, Layers: 1
> GRU_Medium GRU Hidden Dim: 128, Layers: 2
> GRU_Deep GRU Hidden Dim: 128, Layers: 4
> GRU_Wide GRU Hidden Dim: 256, Layers: 2

To approximate temporal awareness, we also implemented 

Sliding Window variants (W=5) across the four MLP archi -

tectures, using the same hidden layer parameters. 

c)  Results Analysis: 

> Fig. 7. Architecture Comparison (Metric: MSE). Error bars represent the
> standard deviation across 5 runs. Note: GRU_Wide is plot under Deep+.

The performance comparison in  Figure 7  highlights dis -

tinct trends between the MLP and GRU architectures: 

1)  MLP Superiority:  In our experimental setting, the 

MLP architectures consistently outperformed the GRU 

variants. The MLP_Deep configuration achieved the 

lowest Mean MSE overall (approximately 0.05). 

2)  Depth vs. Width:  For the MLP, increasing network 

depth provided significant performance gains, with 

MLP_Deep notably outperforming MLP_Medium and 

MLP_Small. Increasing width did not improve perfor -

mance as MLP_Deep_Scaled was unable to achieve 

a significant reduction in MSE over MLP_Deep. This 

suggests that for this task, increasing the depth of the 

network is more beneficial for performance. 

3)  Impact of Sliding Window:  Contrary to the expec -

tation that history would aid prediction, the inclusion 

of a sliding window did not result in a reduction in 

MSE. In fact, the sliding window resulted in a slight 

increase in MSE for medium and deep models. This 

counter-intuitive result suggests that for this specific 

task, the current state contains sufficient information 

to determine the optimal control action (Markov 

property). The sliding window likely complicated the 

optimization landscape, introducing redundant noise 

to the model. 

4)  GRU Performance:  The GRU models struggled to 

match the precision of the MLPs. GRU_Shallow per -

formed the worst among all tested configurations 

(MSE  ≈ 2.7). Increasing complexity helped; GRU_Deep 

and GRU_Wide achieved significant improvements 

upon the shallower variants, though still lagging 

behind the MLP models. 

Based on these results, MLP_Deep demonstrates the 

strongest predictive capability and stability on the test set. 

D.  Online evaluation (MuJoCo) 

To validate these offline findings, we conducted a com -

prehensive online evaluation. We deployed every trained 

controller into the closed-loop MuJoCo simulation. These 

were benchmarked against the original MPC policy (Expert). 

We executed 1000 random test episodes, with a limit of 

5150 steps per episode, for each model. Performance was 

measured using  Success Rate , defined as the percentage of 

episodes where the end-effector converges within a Euclid -

ean distance  𝜀  of the target. To analyze precision, three tiers 

were established: Strict ( 𝜀  = 0.02𝑚 ), Moderate ( 𝜀  = 0.03𝑚 ), 

and Relaxed ( 𝜀  = 0.05𝑚 ). We also tracked  Inference La -

tency  to quantify the speedup relative to the MPC solver. 

a)  Success Rate Results:  While Scikit-learn baselines failed 

to control the robot ( < 35% success rate), the PyTorch-based 

architectures produced results comparable to the MPC. 

> Fig. 8. Comparison of closed-loop success rates across different error toler -
> ances ( 𝜀 ). The bar graphs represent the mean values across 5 runs.

Figure 8  illustrates the performance of the top-performing 

models. The results highlight a precision gap in behavior 

cloning. MLP_Deep was able to achieve 84.98% success 

rate under relaxed tolerances, but only 64.16% under strict 

tolerance. However, the mean final tracking error was only 

2.9 cm, confirming that the majority of failures were near-

misses. This evaluation also confirms our results from earlier, 

whereby static MLP outperformed temporal architectures, 

validating that temporal history is unnecessary for this task. 

b)  Computational Efficiency:  We compared the distribution 

of solve times between the MPC and MLP_Deep. 

> Fig. 9. Distribution of Inference Latency per Control Step.

The MLP_Deep policy achieved a mean solve time of 1.102 

±0.614ms. This is nearly one-third of the mean solve time 

of the MPC Expert. Notably, the neural network offers a 

much more deterministic inference time as seen in  Figure 9 ,

making it more suitable for hard real-time constraints than 

the MPC, whose solve time fluctuates significantly based on 

the optimization landscape. Additionally, MLP_Deep utilized 

significantly fewer system resources, with a 25% decrease in 

CPU utilization as compared to the MPC. 

E.  Discussion and Conclusion 

Our results show a strong alignment between offline 

regression metrics and closed-loop control performance. The 

low offline MSE  ≈ 0.5 successfully translated to a robust 

online policy, achieving a 84.98% success rate under relaxed 

tolerances. The mean final tracking error of 2.9cm is not 

a failure of generalization, but rather a direct reflection of 

the resolution limit inherent in the offline data. The neural 

network successfully learned the expert’s global trajectory, 

but lacks the gradient-based feedback required to eliminate 

the final centimeter of error. 

Crucially, the failure of Sliding Window and GRU models 

to outperform static MLPs confirms that the dynamics for 

our specific setup are strictly Markovian and are fully cap -

tured by the current state ( 𝑞 ,̇ 𝑞 ). Regarding model capacity, 

while network depth proved critical for capturing the non-

linear inverse dynamics, increasing width did not achieve 

significant performance gains. This suggests that for this 

specific task, adding more layers is far more effective than 

adding more neurons. 

In conclusion, a standard Feedforward Neural Network 

is able to approximate an MPC policy with approximately 

1ms inference latency and 2.9cm average error. MLP_Deep 

emerged as the optimal architecture, achieving significant 

improvements in speed and resource utilization, confirming 

that the learned policy is sufficiently lightweight for deploy -

ment on resource-constrained embedded systems. 

VIII.  Future Work 

This work establishes a foundation for behavior cloning 

of MPC on 3-DOF manipulators, which can be extended 

in several directions. Firstly, to bridge the precision gap 

under strict tolerances, future work should incorporate Data 

Aggregation (DAgger), allowing the learner to query the 

expert and correct the terminal steady-state error. 

Secondly, future work should investigate this approach on 

robotic manipulators with higher degrees of freedom (e.g., 

6-DOF). We hypothesize that increasing network depth and 

dataset size will become critical when state and action space 

dimensionality increases significantly. 

Additionally, to advance towards real-world deployment, 

the methodology should be extended to handle more com -

plex control scenarios. It could be interesting to investigate 

the cloning of a non-linear MPC which is capable of handling 

more complex dynamics. 

From a methodological perspective, exploring advanced 

neural network architectures represents a promising direc -

tion. Transformer models, with their self-attention mecha -

nisms, could be investigated for their ability to capture com -

plex, long-range dependencies. Furthermore, the Legendre 

Memory Unit (LMU)  [6] , developed at the University of 

Waterloo, offers a complementary, principled approach to 

continuous time memory, which may prove to be well-

suited for the robotic system’s underlying dynamics. Inverse 

reinforcement learning  [3]  may prove to be an efficient 

alternative to learn the underlying MPC cost function. 

6Acknowledgments 

This project is a final project for the course “Foundations 

of Artificial Intelligence” - SYDE522. We would like to thank 

our instructor Terry Stewart for his guidance and support. 

References 

[1]  Z. Zhou, Y. Zhang, and Y. Li, “Model Predictive Control Design of a 3-

DOF Robot Arm Based on Recognition of Spatial Coordinates.” [Online]. 

Available:  https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.01706 

[2]  C. Gonzalez, H. Asadi, L. Kooijman, and C. P. Lim, “Neural Networks 

for Fast Optimisation in Model Predictive Control: A Review.” [Online]. 

Available:  https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.02668 

[3]  V. G. de A. Porto, D. C. Melo, M. R. Maximo, and R. J. Afonso, “Imitation 

learning of a model predictive controller for real-time humanoid robot 

walking,”  Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence , vol. 143, p. 

109919, Mar. 2025, doi:  10.1016/j.engappai.2024.109919 .

[4]  N. Ngoc Son, H. P. H. Anh, and N. Thanh Nam, “Robot manipulator 

identification based on adaptive multiple-input and multiple-output 

neural model optimized by advanced differential evolution algorithm,” 

International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems , vol. 14, no. 1, Dec. 

2016, doi:  10.1177/1729881416677695 .

[5]  J. A. E. Andersson, J. Gillis, G. Horn, J. B. Rawlings, and M. Diehl, 

“CasADi – A software framework for nonlinear optimization and 

optimal control,”  Mathematical Programming Computation , 2018. 

[6]  A. Voelker, I. Kajić, and C. Eliasmith, “Legendre Memory Units: Contin -

uous-Time Representation in Recurrent Neural Networks,” in  Advances 

in Neural Information Processing Systems , H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. 

Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett, Eds., Curran Asso -

ciates, Inc., 2019, p. . [Online]. Available:  https://proceedings.neurips. 

cc/paper_files/paper/2019/file/952285b9b7e7a1be5aa7849f32ffff05-Paper. 

pdf 

7